

## 4.3

### Query 1

Consider the following query to calculate the total revenue since inception per city. 

```{sql}
WITH Profits AS (
    SELECT O.price - P.price AS Profit, city
    FROM Orders O
    NATURAL JOIN ConsistOf
    NATURAL JOIN Publications P
    NATURAL JOIN MakesOrder
    NATURAL JOIN Distributors
)
SELECT city, SUM(Profit) As Revenue
FROM Profits
GROUP BY city;
```

The main query starts at the outer `SELECT` clause. Since we're grouping by city, we must also select it. We get profits from a temporary table using the `WITH...SELECT` clause, that works by joining tables by naturally following the relations in the E/R diagram. Distributors make orders, and orders consist of publications. The schema for each relation allows for a `NATURAL JOIN`, since the joining attributes (and only the joining attributes) have the same name across all 5 joined relations. Within this joined table, we assume "revenue" means profit, and therefore subtract cost price from selling price. We also return the city, so that the outer query can easily use this information.

The corresponding relational algebra query would be:
$$
\begin{aligned}
	\text{Profits } &\leftarrow \rho_{\text{ Profits(Profit, city)}}\left(\pi_{\text{ O.price - P.price, city}}\left(\rho_O(\text{Orders} ) \bowtie \text{ ConsistOf }\bowtie \rho_P(\text{Publications}) \bowtie \text{ MakesOrder } \bowtie \text{ Distributors }\right)\right) \\
	R_1 &\leftarrow \rho_{R_1(\text{city, profit})}\left(\gamma_{\text{ city}, \text{ SUM(Profit)}}\left( \text{Profits} \right)\right)
\end{aligned}
$$

### Query 2

Consider the following query to find books by date of publication.

```{sql}
SELECT title, ISBN
FROM Publications
NATURAL JOIN Books
WHERE dop = ...;
```

Using the ER model for inheritance, we only need to look at the Publications and Books relations, and they are joined by their common `pid` attribute. We then select only those tuples where the date of publication matches what we want.

The corresponding relational algebra query is
$$
\pi_{\text{title, ISBN}}\left( \sigma_{\text{dop = ...}}\left( \text{Publications} \bowtie \text{Books} \right) \right)
$$
